---
title: Strategy
date: 2012-08-23
layout: post.html
---

To generate a country-wide high voltage map, we hypothesized that a two part processing pipeline would work best. A machine learning model comprised the first component, which predicted the probability of a HV tower within individual zoom 18 satellite image tiles. The strength of this component is its processing speed -- when running on a modern GPU, the model is capable of processing hundreds of thousands of images per hour. We did not expect extremely high performance, however, so this first component acts as a first pass at detecting HV towers. The second component in the pipeline is made up of professional mappers. Humans are naturally more accurate at this task as they can easily recognize HV towers against a wide range of backdrops from desert to dense forests. Therefore, they can accurately trace from tower to tower and mark questionable locations. Our goal was to combine these two components into an accurate but fast pipeline. The ML component acted to rapidly produce a prioritization map, which then guides the human mappers to high-value areas likely to contain a tower. They could then trace every component of the HV grid whether the ML model detected it or not. This ensured that their efforts were intelligently allocated instead of using a brute force approach that required them to review every meter of ground manually. It also implies that every edit added to OpenStreetMap is made by a human -- an important validation step to avoid adding erroneous changes to this community-driven map.

Existing maps of the target countries did exist, but in general they were incomplete or outdated. In Pakistan, XXX. In Nigeria and Zambia two major efforts have been made to map the HV infrastructure. The first, XXX. The second, part of the Africa Electricity Grid Explorer, XXX. These maps each required extensive manual effort to produce; for this reason, it was not cost-effective to produce a map every with regularity or map multiple countries. Here, our three target countries included Pakistan (1,009,303 km2, 50 million zoom 18 tiles), Nigeria (927,886 km2, 40 million zoom 18 tiles), and Zambia (777,773 km2, 34 million zoom 18 tiles). Our aim was map HV infrastructure in these countries, but also to develop a reusable framework to reduce the time and cost associated with any future maps.
