---
title: Improving ML output
date: 2012-08-23
layout: post.html
---

## Substations
Power substations act as important hubs within the HV network. They step down the raw electricity voltage making it useful to residential or industrial purposes. In the course of mapping, our Data Team realized that we should detect these substations in any future work. Localizing substations will make it substantially easier to map HV towers because these substations represent possible endpoints for electricity transmission. Now that our team has mapped tens of thousands of substations across three full countries, we should have the training data necessary to generate a new model capable of recognizing these structures.

## Better detection of HV towers
When we began this project, we did not have any validated training data. We tasked our Data Team with manually reviewing three relatively small areas — one region in each country — and ensuring that every meter of ground was checked for the presence of a HV tower. Of course, this was a slow task (and exactly the problem we were trying to solve), but necessary to generate a training set of imagery to build our machine learning model. These initial training datasets covered about XXX% of the total area that would eventually be processed when moving to the country-wide scale.

Now that we have the complete high-voltage infrastructure mapped in three full countries, we have a vastly larger set of data to train the next iteration of the model. Future iterations should start by adding data from where the model performed most poorly. For example, the agricultural region of Pakistan is a great place to start as the gridded farmland regularly confused or ML model. In iteration of the project, the only training data in Pakistan came from the desert mountainous region in the Western half of the country. Therefore, the model generalized poorly to the more lush farmland along the Eastern border simply because it was not exposed to imagery from that region. The model was also confused in certain regions where there were issues with DG's imagery including shading or blurriness. Again, having more data with this issues present will provide training data that better represents to true data distribution and ameliorate the problem. In the future, a simple strategy might be to build training imagery from numerous small regions, representing most or all of each country's different terrain (as opposed to a few large regions as done initially). Again, this will result in training data sets that better capture the full distribution of possible images the model might encounter when processing across an entire country. 

## SAR imagery
Here, we used optical (i.e., RGB) imagery to make all of our predictions. The initial [pilot phase of this project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic-aperture_radar), however, involved synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery -- an active sensing technique that emits and receives microwave energy. In some cases, man-made structures like HV towers reflect SAR imagery quite strongly making them visible even in low-resolution imagery. This imaging technique is also advantageous in that it is not affected by clouds or shadows. That said, it suffers in mountainous and forested regions because the technique measures gradients in surface height. While we don’t expect SAR imagery to replace our current approach, it may act as a power tool to validate portions of the network with high confidence.

## Improving mapping workflow
Machine learning aside, there is room for improvement on the human-side of our mapping efforts carried out by the Data Team. The concept of using machine learning to guide mapping was new and untested for our professional mappers and our ML team, so we collected ideas to streamline the process throughout this project. Early on, our Data Team realized that navigating through the ML model's predictions was slow — initially they were repeatedly zooming in to map a few towers and then zooming out to reestablish a high-level view of the predictions. This constant reorientation of the view also made it difficult to keep track of which areas had been reviewed. As discussed in the Methods, the Data Team built its own To-Fix plugin within JOSM so they could click through the model's predictions with a single button. 

Another limitation was that the ML predictions were not available to view in the tasking manager. Again, this is the piece of software that mappers regularly use to "lock" and then review small regions when a group of people is mapping the same larger area. Initially, there was no way to view the ML predictions in this overlay. Toward the middle of this project, we were also able to create the ability to add the ML overlay just like other map layers, so now the basic ML overlay appears in the tasking manager. 

The Data Team also noted that image quality varied across entire countries. In some cases, it was difficult to make accurate maps due to blurry or otherwise poor-quality imagery. In the future, we should explore other sources of data. Additionally, there were some cases where the network structure was ambiguous. For example, we found connections involving three HV towers, changes in the size (and possibly voltage) of HV towers, or areas where the HV lines appeared to bifurcate. In these special cases, we should explore the possibility of an engineering consult who is familiar with typical HV network construction.
